## Expected Outcome

- The commercial potential of Horizon research results is explored;
- Results of Horizon projects are valorised, by ensuring a pathway to commercialisation; and
- Startups and SMEs become involved in valorisation.

## Scope

The EU must do better in translating the knowledge generated by the Framework Programme into innovations with economic and societal value.

The objective of this action is to provide financial support (‘Proof of market’) to small consortia (i.e. spin-offs, startups, SMEs) to explore the exploitation potential, in the EU, of achieved results from ongoing or completed projects funded under Cluster 4 ‘Digital, Industry and Space’ or its predecessor activities under the Leadership in enabling and industrial technologies (LEIT)[1] part of Horizon 2020.

The consortia do not necessarily have to be made of former or current beneficiaries but should own or have access to the knowledge assets of projects, including intellectual property, where relevant.

Proposals should envisage valorisation activities, such as:
- demonstrating a technology (e.g. testing);
- defining a commercialisation process;
- undertaking:   a market and competitiveness analysis;a technology assessment and/or certification;a verification of innovation potential;
- assessing potential “end users” of the expected innovation;
- testing, piloting with users or potential customers;
- complying with regulatory compliance and standards;
- consolidating IP rights.

Proposals should address achieved results from ongoing or completed Research and Innovation Actions and Innovation Actions (RIA/IA) funded directly under Cluster 4 ‘Digital, Industry and Space’ or its predecessor activities under the Leadership in enabling and industrial technologies (LEIT) part of Horizon 2020.

Applicants can be owners of the achieved results from previous projects or new participants. Proposals should include at least one of the following:
- Confirmation that at least one of the applicants of the current proposal is the owner or holder of the relevant knowledge assets including Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) and possesses the necessary rights to commercialise the results for the entire duration of the proposed project, or
- Commitment letter from the owner(s) of the relevant result(s) confirming the owner(s)’ willingness to negotiate fair, reasonable, and non-discriminatory access to the results, including IPR where relevant, for the purpose of future commercial exploitation.

The proposal should specify the grant number and acronym of the project(s) which generated the results.

Proposals should present a clear vision of the intended pathway to market. Hence, the participation of a business partner should be envisaged.

[1] Information and communication technologies, Nanotechnologies, Advanced materials, Advanced manufacturing and processing, Biotechnology and Space.