## Expected Outcome

Project results are expected to contribute to all of the following expected outcomes:
- Police Authorities in Europe benefit from a rapid deployment of targeted detection and investigation tools and related training materials, specifically tailored to counter current, foreseeable and emerging online harms at the outset of each development cycle;
- Police Authorities in Europe are provided with a flexible framework for adaptation via creation of a modular toolset that allows for the incorporation of new functionalities and updates based on the latest trends and threats in online harms;
- Enhanced European stakeholder collaboration through facilitation of partnerships among researchers, policymakers, and Police Authorities in Europe to ensure that tools are not only effective but also user-friendly, legally and ethically sound.

## Scope

As the digital landscape continues to evolve, so too do the myriads of online harms that threaten citizens’ security and well-being. To address these challenges, we invite proposals for the development of detection and investigation tools that employ short development cycle models. This approach emphasizes agility and responsiveness, ensuring that tools can quickly adapt to emerging online threats, such as identity theft, disinformation, deepfakes, spoofing, phishing, digital violence, or, e.g., tools for an early detection as well as real-time monitoring and risk assessment that can identify potential fraudulent sales (“online payment fraud”) before they occur.

This topic welcomes innovative ideas focused on creating efficient detection and investigation tools to combat varying forms of online harms, which should be selected at the beginning of every new development cycle, in agreement with all stakeholders involved in the consortia, especially including concrete needs of Police Authorities. The emphasis on short development cycles allows proposals to remain dynamic, responsive to the fast-paced nature of online threats, and capable of addressing both established issues and new challenges as they arise. Proposals should focus on the iterative process of tool development, integrating feedback from Police Authorities to ensure continuous improvement and relevance in combating online harms. Ultimately, the goal is to foster a proactive and effective response to safeguarding online spaces for all users, regardless of their gender identity or expression.

Proposals are expected to provide ideas on how they would engage with the Europol Innovation Lab during the lifetime of the project. Furthermore, if the proposals concern drug-related issues, they are expected to engage with the EU Drugs Agency during the lifetime of the project, including validating the outcomes. For aspects of training of Police Authorities, cooperation of successful proposals with CEPOL is expected, provided that the Agency opts out from applying for funding. To ensure the active involvement of and timely feedback from relevant security practitioners, proposals should plan a mid-term deliverable consisting in the assessment of the project’s mid-term outcomes, performed by the practitioners involved in the project. Finally, proposals are expected to address all applicable considerations expressed in the Introduction of the Fighting Crime and Terrorism Destination. The project should have a minimum estimated duration of 48 months.

## null

Activities are expected to achieve TRL 6-8 by the end of the project – see General Annex B.