## Expected Outcome

Project results are expected to contribute to some or all of the following expected outcomes:
- Improved understanding of links between addictions and crime, including drivers of criminality;
- Innovative and effective solutions, including training curricula, for Police Authorities in Europe and relevant Civil Society Organisations (or Non-Governmental Organisations) to prevent addictions and related crimes, with a special attention to young people at risk;
- Evidence-based support to modernising European criminal justice system’s approach when dealing with addiction-related offenses;
- Novel approaches of collaboration between different stakeholders, primarily Police Authorities in Europe and Civil Society Organisations (or Non-Governmental Organisations), to increase communities’ addiction resilience, security and safety.

## Scope

A close and complex relationship exists between addictions, such as gambling, drug or alcohol use, and crime (e.g., criminals are often under the influence of drugs while committing crimes, gamblers or drug users commit crimes to pay for their debts or drugs). In this topic, successful proposals are expected to analyse the specific nexus between addictions and crime, with the aim of developing related modern methodologies and tools for prevention of not only addictions but also crimes related to them, both offline and online, while respecting the fundamental rights of the communities concerned and using of non-stigmatising language. Novel approaches of collaboration between different community stakeholders, from Police Authorities, civil society, national and local entities, private actors, trained psychologists, are expected to be developed as well, with the aim of increasing communities’ addiction resilience, security and safety. An emphasis of the work should be on young people at risk, the criminal justice system, drivers of criminality and pathways from committing a petty crime because of addiction to progressively getting involved in organised crime. Activities proposed within this topic should address the issue from various angles, combining both social research with technological development and applications in a logical manner.

Therefore, this topic requires the effective contribution of Social Sciences and Humanities (SSH) disciplines and the involvement of SSH experts, institutions as well as the inclusion of relevant SSH expertise, in order to produce meaningful and significant effects enhancing the societal impact of the related research activities. Also, incorporating a gender-sensitive approach will allow to better understand the relationships between addiction, crime, and gender, leading to more effective interventions that address the specific needs of men, women, and marginalized groups.

Proposals should outline the plans to develop possible future uptake and upscaling at national and EU level for possible next steps once the project is finalised. Proposals should also consider, build on if appropriate and not duplicate previous research. Coordination among the successful proposals from this topic should be envisaged to avoid duplication and to exploit complementarities as well as opportunities for increased impact.

Furthermore, proposals funded under this topic are expected to provide ideas on how they would engage with the European Union Drugs Agency (EUDA) during the lifetime of the project, including validating the outcomes, with the aim of facilitating future uptake of innovations. For aspects of training of Police Authorities, cooperation of successful proposals with CEPOL is expected, provided that the Agency opts out from applying for funding. Finally, proposals are expected to address all applicable considerations expressed in the Introduction of the Fighting Crime and Terrorism Destination.

## Technology Readiness Level - Technology readiness level expected from completed projects

Activities are expected to achieve TRL 5 by the end of the project – see General Annex B.