## Expected Outcome

the project results are expected to contribute to all the following outcomes:
- structuring of the Sustainable Nuclear Energy Technology Platform (SNETP) activities and consolidation of networks in the different technology areas covered by the Euratom programme, together with the Implementing Geological Disposal Technology Platform (IGDTP) and the consortium following the European Radiation Research Platforms (MEENAS). The focusing will be on cross-cutting nuclear energy applications (e.g. nuclear for heat or/and electricity production, energy supply in space and maritime propulsion) and on non-energy applications (including cross-cutting or medical applications of ionising radiation and improved optimisation of protection in this area);
- integrating the different energy roadmaps (nuclear and non-nuclear) by fostering collaboration between European Technology and Innovation Platforms in order to address cross-sectorial challenges. This will include (a) integration of NPPs into sustainable low-carbon and smart energy systems to complement the achievement of Horizon Europe’s objectives (including in the context of the energy transition); and (b) development of power systems for space applications;
- supporting the integration of SNETP in Horizon Europe’s cross-sectorial activities, with particular emphasis on non-power applications and associated radiation protection, education and training. Cross-cutting actions to maximise the societal benefits of nuclear and radiation technologies should be identified;
- supporting the identification of research priorities and key actions for the nuclear R&I community within various EU policy instruments (e.g. SET Plan updates and annual reports);
- communicating the platform's activities to policymakers and stakeholders (including stakeholders outside the power generation sector);
- facilitating cooperation between projects throughout the EU in order to ensure the accessibility and reusability of produced data.

## Scope

SNETP is a European technology and innovation platform (ETIP) that supports and promotes the safe, secure, reliable and efficient operation of nuclear systems. Rapidly developing non-power applications of ionising radiation (e.g. in the health, industrial and space sectors) will require long-term effort to reduce safety risks and support the development of safe nuclear technologies and optimal radiation protection.

In this context, SNETP should, in 2026-2027, continue to integrate research and innovation in nuclear safety at the EU level. It should also stimulate innovation in nuclear technologies beyond their more traditional areas of implementation because they can play a vital role in improving standards of living and health in the EU.

Euratom funding will be devoted to specific studies, data collection, analysis and workshops for the further development of technology roadmaps, implementation plans and deployment strategies, as well as to the dissemination of the platform activities to the various stakeholders. Due attention should be given to integrating the different energy roadmaps (nuclear and non-nuclear). Activities should aim to foster collaboration between ETIPs in order to address cross-sectoral challenges (i.e. involving both nuclear and non-nuclear energy sources), with a particular emphasis on materials, digital and AI, and the medical and other non-power applications of ionising radiation.

This action should support SNETP in structuring its activities and orienting them towards cross-sectoral and non-power applications. It should enable the consolidation of sustainable networks across the different technology areas covered by the Euratom Research and Training Programme and should facilitate cooperation with other ETIPs and similar stakeholder forums. It should support SNETP efforts to foster more interconnected activities with other industrial sectors (particularly the health sector), in terms of both content and implementation mechanisms. It should also help nuclear scientists to more closely integrate into relevant Horizon Europe actions (e.g. Europe’s Beating Cancer Action Plan and Cancer Mission) and thus help communicate the platform and Programme activities to policymakers and stakeholders outside the power generation sector.

The proposal should include actions to facilitate cooperation with other projects across the EU and to ensure the accessibility and reusability of data produced in the course of the projects. The proposal should also include a financial and sustainability plan for the continuation of activities beyond the duration of the funded action. SNETP’s secretariat and other running costs are not eligible for funding under this action.

The indicative project duration is three years.