## Expected Outcome

Project results are expected to contribute to all of the following expected outcomes:
- New tools, skills and methodologies for Police Authorities in Europe to deal efficiently with diverse communities as well as with diversity among police personnel are identified, developed and disseminated throughout Europe, leading to, among others, an increased trust to Police Authorities in general;
- Modern and effective training curricula for Police Authorities in Europe are developed on community policing in diverse societies, including post-conflict zones, and addressing the needs of individuals from various social, ethnic and religious backgrounds, as well as marginalized groups such as migrants, LGBTIQ people, persons with disabilities, or returnees from war.

## Scope

This topic addresses challenges of community policing in increasingly diverse and sometimes also fragile societies, including the integration of returnees from conflict zones, migrants, as well as marginalized communities including LGBTIQ individuals and various ethnic and religious groups.

Encompassing a post-conflict dimension too, particularly in the context of Ukraine, this topic aims to foster inclusive community policing practices that can adapt to the complexities of diverse societal dynamics. Proposals should explore innovative and inclusive approaches in police education, training and management that go beyond traditional models, resulting in an effective engagement with a diversifying society. Proposals should also seek to identify and develop effective practices and training programs that encourage a deeper understanding of diversity among police personnel and integrate a gender-sensitive and intersectional approach when relevant. In addition, proposals should assess how effective cooperation with Civil Society Organizations (or Non-Governmental Organisations) - representing various communities - can enhance reporting mechanisms, reduce hate crimes, and strengthen trust and cooperation between the police and the population. By improving police-citizen relations across diverse European contexts, the proposals should aim to contribute to enhanced security and social stability in Europe. Proposals’ findings should generate valuable insights applicable to varied policing environments, ultimately informing police forces across Europe about non-violent conflict resolution and constructive engagement strategies. Through collaborative research and training, proposals should equip Police Authorities with the tools, skills and methodologies necessary to effectively serve and engage with diverse communities, foster social cohesion, and build trust throughout Europe.

Activities proposed within this topic should address the issue from various angles, combining social sciences with technological development and applications in a logical manner.

Therefore, this topic requires the effective contribution of SSH disciplines and the involvement of SSH experts, institutions as well as the inclusion of relevant SSH expertise, in order to produce meaningful and significant effects enhancing the societal impact of the related research activities.

Proposals should outline the plans to develop possible future uptake and upscaling at national and EU level for possible next steps once the project is finalised. Proposals should also consider, build on if appropriate and not duplicate previous research. Coordination among the successful proposals from this topic should be envisaged to avoid duplication and to exploit complementarities as well as opportunities for increased impact. Furthermore, if the proposals concern drug-related issues, they are expected to engage with the EU Drugs Agency during the lifetime of the project, including validating the outcomes. For aspects of training of Police Authorities, cooperation of successful proposals with CEPOL is expected, provided that the Agency opts out from applying for funding. To ensure the active involvement of and timely feedback from relevant security practitioners, proposals should plan a mid-term deliverable consisting in the assessment of the project’s mid-term outcomes, performed by the practitioners involved in the project. Finally, proposals are expected to address all applicable considerations expressed in the Introduction of the Fighting Crime and Terrorism Destination.

## null

Activities are expected to achieve TRL 6-8 by the end of the project – see General Annex B.